Materialized View Spec (#11041)
apache/iceberg: format/view-spec.md

Writers create view metadata files optimistically, assuming that the current metadata location will not be changed before the writer's commit. Once a writer has created an update, it commits by swapping the view's metadata file pointer from the base location to the new location.

### Materialized Views

Views have the option to be turned into materialized views by precomputing the data from the view query.
When queried, materialized views return the precomputed data, shifting the cost of query execution to the precomputation step.

Iceberg materialized views are implemented as a combination of an Iceberg view and an underlying Iceberg table, known as the storage table, which stores the precomputed data.
The metadata for a materialized view extends the common view metadata, adding a pointer to the precomputed data and freshness information to determine if the data is still fresh. 

> The storage table can have the states "fresh", "stale" or "invalid".

Reviewer: I don't see a property for this state on the storage table?   I also don't think we need it.

Author: What I mean is that if you check for the freshness of the table, the result can be "fresh", "stale", or "invalid". Maybe state is not the right term for it. And you can't assign a property to it. Maybe we can drop the sentence from the spec.

Reviewer: oic now, then I don't think we need to drop the sentence.

Reviewer 2: maybe a minor change from `can have` to `can be` would avoid the misinterpretation. `have` can imply `containing the state field`.

> The storage table can be in the states of "fresh", "stale" or "invalid".

Author: I would consider the storage table as an implementation detail of the materialized view and not as an actual logical entity. That's why the schema of the storage table should not be altered by itself without changing the view. 
Instead one common scenario would be to add a column in the view definition which in turn would affect the agenda of the storage table. So everytime the version of the view changes, the storage table is to be considered invalid.

The freshness information is composed of data about the so-called "source tables", which are the tables referenced in the query definition of the materialized view. 

## Specification

### Terms

* **Schema** -- Names and types of fields in a view.
* **Version** -- The state of a view at some point in time.
* **Storage table** -- Iceberg table that stores the precomputed data of the materialized view.

> * **Source table** -- A table reference that occurs in the query definition of the materialized view. The materialized view depends on the data from the source tables.

Reviewer: Yeah, I think mentioning views is important in the description too.  

`The materialized view depends on the data from the source tables and the definitions of the source views.`

> * **Source view** -- A view reference that occurs in the query definition of a materialized view. The materialized view depends on the definitions from the source views.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

Add this additional term:

**Nested materialized view** -- A dependent materialized view that is used in refreshing the current materialized view.

Writers create view metadata files optimistically, assuming that the current metadata location will not be changed before the writer's commit. Once a writer has created an update, it commits by swapping the view's metadata file pointer from the base location to the new location.

### Materialized Views

Materialized views are a type of view with precomputed results from the view query stored as a table.
When queried, engines may return the precomputed data for the materialized views, shifting the cost of query execution to the precomputation step.

Iceberg materialized views are implemented as a combination of an Iceberg view and an underlying Iceberg table, the "storage-table", which stores the precomputed data.
Materialized View metadata is a superset of View metadata with an additional pointer to the storage table. The storage table is an Iceberg table with additional materialized view refresh state metadata.

> Refresh metadata contains information about the "source tables" and/or "source views", which are the tables/views referenced in the query definition of the materialized view.

Reviewer 3: this reads like "Source materialized view" excluded from the list on purpose ( i remember use agreeing that source materialized view should be included with precise  spelling out of what it means)

## Specification

### Terms

* **Schema** -- Names and types of fields in a view.
* **Version** -- The state of a view at some point in time.
* **Storage table** -- Iceberg table that stores the precomputed data of a materialized view.
* **Source table** -- A table reference that occurs in the query definition of a materialized view.
* **Source view** -- A view reference that occurs in the query definition of a materialized view.

> * **Source materialized view** -- A materialized view reference that occurs in the query definition of a materialized view.

Reviewer 4: This is Longzhong from Singdata
Materialized views may maintain one or more state tables to support incremental maintenance.
State tables are  used to store intermediate computation state required for incremental view maintenance.
so, is state table planned in the future?

Writers create view metadata files optimistically, assuming that the current metadata location will not be changed before the writer's commit. Once a writer has created an update, it commits by swapping the view's metadata file pointer from the base location to the new location.

### Materialized Views

Materialized views are a type of view that precompute the data from the view query.
When queried, materialized views return the precomputed data, shifting the cost of query execution to the precomputation step.

Iceberg materialized views are implemented as a combination of an Iceberg view and an underlying Iceberg table, known as the storage table, which stores the precomputed data.
The metadata for a materialized view extends the common view metadata, adding a pointer to the precomputed data and information about the refresh state to determine if the data is still fresh. 

> The refresh state is composed of data about the so-called "source tables", which are the tables referenced in the query definition of the materialized view. 

Reviewer 5: Nit: how about new paragraph for 'refresh state'

and then bullet point for each state

Also , is refresh state the same as storage table state?  Its a bit confusing to read as is, can use the same terminology if its the same?

## Specification

### Terms

* **Schema** -- Names and types of fields in a view.
* **Version** -- The state of a view at some point in time.
* **Storage table** -- Iceberg table that stores the precomputed data of a materialized view.
* **Refresh state** -- A record stored in the storage table's snapshot summary that captures the state of source tables and views at the time of the last refresh operation.
* **Dependency graph** -- The graph of all source tables, views, and materialized views that a materialized view depends on, including nested dependencies.

> * **Source table** -- A table reference that occurs in the query definition of a materialized view.

Reviewer 2: we define the sources as direct children here. In the refresh state, the field name is `source-states`. If we put those two together, it conflicts with the wording of `Producers may selectively choose a subset of their dependencies to record`.

We need to nail down those terms. A few other names have been floated in other comment threads, like `base`, `upstream` etc.

Reviewer: How about simply:  A table reference that appears in the dependency graph.

This implies it can be direct or transitive.

Same change as below for source views and source MVs.

Author: Thanks Steven for catching this.

> How about simply: A table reference that appears in the dependency graph.

I thought we wanted to contain the use of dependency to the "Refresh-state" section.

I went with the formulation that we used in the last sync. Check, if it works for you

* **Source view** -- A view reference that is used in the computation of the query results of a materialized view.

> * **Source materialized view** -- A materialized view reference that is used in the computation of the query results of a materialized view.

Reviewer 6: I am not sure we really need that section. It might bring more questions than answers since all of that is discussed in detail below. Some of the terms are also standard terms (e.g., Schema, Version) that are not necessarily scoped to MVs. My recommendation is to remove this section.

Reviewer 7: +1. 
I'm in favor of being concise. We can fold this into the sections below.

Writers create view metadata files optimistically, assuming that the current metadata location will not be changed before the writer's commit. Once a writer has created an update, it commits by swapping the view's metadata file pointer from the base location to the new location.

### Materialized Views

> Materialized views are a type of view that precompute the data from the view query.

Reviewer 8: A little more wordsmithing here for correctness: this currently gives the impression that the view is responsible for the precomputation, which isn't what we want to convey.

Materialized views are a type of view with precomputed results from the view query stored as a table.

> When queried, materialized views return the precomputed data, shifting the cost of query execution to the precomputation step.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
When queried, engines may return the precomputed data for the materialized views, shifting the cost of query execution to the precomputation step.
```

> Iceberg materialized views are implemented as a combination of an Iceberg view and an underlying Iceberg table, known as the storage table, which stores the precomputed data.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Iceberg materialized views are implemented as a combination of an Iceberg view and an underlying Iceberg table, the "storage-table", which stores the precomputed data.
```

> Materialized View metadata is a superset of View metadata with an additional pointer to the storage table and refresh metadata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Materialized View metadata is a superset of View metadata with an additional pointer to the storage table with refresh metadata.
```

Reviewer 2: `and` would be misinterpreted that the refresh metadata is part of the view entity. `with` is more clear that the refresh state is part of the storage table

> Materialized View metadata is a superset of View metadata with an additional pointer to the storage table which contains additional refresh metadata.

Author: I updated the spec according to your first suggestion.

I would leave the second part as is since the terms "source tables" are used in the following sentences and needs an introduction.

> The metadata for a materialized view extends the common view metadata, adding a pointer to the precomputed data and refresh information to determine if the data is still fresh. 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The metadata for a materialized view extends the Iceberg view metadata, adding a pointer to the precomputed data and refresh information to determine if the data is still fresh. 
```

> The metadata for a materialized view extends the Iceberg view metadata, adding a pointer to the precomputed data and refresh information to determine if the data is still fresh. 

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Materialized View metadata is a superset of View metadata with an additional pointer to the storage table and refresh metadata.
```

> The refresh information is composed of data about the so-called "source tables", which are the tables referenced in the query definition of the materialized view. 

Reviewer 9: Refresh metadata contains information about the tables referenced in the query definition of the materialized view.

> The storage table can be "fresh", "stale" or "invalid", depending on the following the following situations:

Reviewer 2: want to clarify that the state is a computed value during read and is not sth stored in the refresh state.

> The storage table can be in the states of "fresh", "stale" or "invalid", which are determined from the following situations:

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
The storage table can be "fresh", "stale" or "invalid":
```

> During read time, a materialized view (storage table) can be interpreted as "fresh", "stale" or "invalid", depending on the following situations:

Reviewer: Since there are many use cases for allowing an engine to use a stale materialization, can we add a "warm" situation with the description:

**warm** - The `snapshot_id`s do not match for at-least one source table and the snapshot was committed after the current time minus materialization.max-stalessness-ms

> * **fresh** -- The `snapshot_id`'s of the last refresh operation match the current `snapshot_id`'s of the source tables.

Reviewer 5: Nit: i think we shouldnt have the apostrophe here (it seems a possessive one then of `snapshot_id`, which is wrong).  Same for the next one.

Author: Thank you!

> * **stale** -- The `snapshot_id`'s don't match, indicating that a refresh operation needs to be performed to capture the latest source table changes.

Reviewer 5: nit: suggestion to avoid the contraction 'don't' in format spec

> * **stale** -- The `snapshot_id`s do not match, indicating that a refresh operation needs to be performed to capture the latest source table changes.

Reviewer 10: Should we consider the case where the current materialized view references another materialized view? If we determine that the current materialized view is not stale, we should also ensure that any referenced materialized views are not marked as invalid.

Reviewer 11: it seems that from the rest of the spec, nested view is indeed a valid use case, for materialized view referring other materialized views or even common views. However it seems to me that the rest of the spec didn't mention one of these states being recorded anywhere in the spec, which I would also agree to not include since it feels very challenging to ensure this info could be trustworthy especially when there are multiple engines doing reads/writes on the same data. With this, do we mention these `fresh`/`stale`/`invalid` here mostly for establishing a nomenclature for view users? If so I wonder if it's worth explicitly mentioning that to avoid the user expecting one of these three states to be recorded in their view metadata.

Author: Thanks @chenjian2664 and @yyanyy for your comments. These are great points. The current definition supports nested views in that it fully expands the query tree at refresh time and stores all directly and indirectly referenced tables in the refresh-state. This can include multiple levels of views.
This currently would also apply to materialized views. However, I think you're making a good point. When referencing another materialized view it would be easier to just store the snapshot_id of its storage table instead of tracking all table references in the materialized view.

You're correct in assuming that `fresh`/`stale`/`invalid` are introduced to have some nomenclature, these to not occur in the metadata. I will try to make this clearer.

Author: Which option do you prefer? And should I include this in the spec?

Reviewer 2: Personally, I prefer the 2nd option (treating source MV as a table). 

But we need to wait for more people to weigh in before we make any change to this PR.

> * **fresh** -- The `snapshot_id`s of the last refresh operation match the current `snapshot_id`s of all the source tables, OR all source table snapshots that differ from the last refresh have timestamps within a configured staleness window.

Reviewer 12: I think during the last meeting we have agreed to use "delayed view definition/semantics" as it doesn't mandate optimizations and allows for false negatives (allows claiming that view is stale as freshness logic is naive ). The wording above mandates very specific optimization of additional checks needed if refresh is outside of the staleness window.  
proposal: 

Invalid: The current version_id of the materialized view does not match the view-version-id recorded in its refresh state. A read operation cannot proceed using the materialized view's data. 

Fresh: if it is Valid and the stored data represents the result set that would have been retrieved if the underlying View Query was executed at some point during the defined Staleness Window. 

stale: if it is valid but not Fresh.

> * **stale** -- The `snapshot_id`s do not match for at-least one source table, indicating that a refresh operation needs to be performed to capture the latest source table changes.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is inaccurate anymore with the `max-staleness-ms` config

> * **fresh** -- The `snapshot_id`s of the last refresh operation match the current `snapshot_id`s of the source tables.
> * **stale** -- The `snapshot_id`s do not match, indicating that a refresh operation needs to be performed to capture the latest source table changes.
> * **invalid** -- The current `version_id` of the materialized view does not match the `refresh-version-id` of the refresh state. 

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
* **fresh** -- The `snapshot_id`s of the last refresh operation match the current `snapshot_id`s of all the source tables.
* **stale** -- The `snapshot_id`s do not match for at-least one source table, indicating that a refresh operation needs to be performed to capture the latest source table changes.
* **invalid** -- The current `version_id` of the materialized view does not match the `refresh-version-id` of the refresh state. 
```

nitpicking but I think it helps to be explicit since I don't see much discussion about how would multi-table MVs work yet. Or is it not considered in scope for the initial spec changes?

Reviewer: If you are talking about different physical representations of the same view, we did discuss this and decided it was out of scope.

Author: @hashhar I think your changes make it more precise. Thank you!

Reviewer 13: @bennychow I was not thinking of multi-engine/multiple materializations. I was thinking of a MV which selects from multiple source tables like: `CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW mv AS SELECT t1.key, t2.value FROM t1 INNER JOIN t2 ON t1.id=t2.id`

Reviewer: oic.. yes, this spec supports your example with t1 and t2... or if they were views.. and even if there was time travel on the tables.

> * **invalid** -- The current `version_id` of the materialized view does not match the `refresh-version-id` of the refresh state. 

Reviewer 6: I do not see `refresh-version-id` referenced elsewhere in the spec.

Author: Thanks for the catch, it's supposed to be `view-version-id`. This was changed during the discussion. I'll update it

## Specification

### Terms

* **Schema** -- Names and types of fields in a view.
* **Version** -- The state of a view at some point in time.
* **Storage table** -- Iceberg table that stores the precomputed data of the materialized view.
* **Source table** -- A table reference that occurs in the query definition of the materialized view. The materialized view depends on the data from the source tables.

> * **Source view** -- A view reference that occurs in the query definition of the materialized view. The materialized view depends on the definitions from the source views.

Reviewer 9: I'm a little lost on this part, what is a Source view? Is it just any relation that isn't an Iceberg table? I assume it's not an Iceberg view?

Reviewer: It is an Iceberg View.  So like if MV SQL was:  select * from v1 - v1 would be a source view for the MV.

Reviewer 2: MV SQL can reference tables or views. They are called source tables or views.

| _required_  | `versions`           | A list of known [versions](#versions) of the view [1] |
| _required_  | `version-log`        | A list of [version log](#version-log) entries with the timestamp and `version-id` for every change to `current-version-id` |
| _optional_  | `properties`         | A string to string map of view properties [2] |

> | _optional_  | `max-staleness-ms`   | The maximum time interval in milliseconds during which changed source table snapshots are considered fresh enough to skip refreshing [3] |

Reviewer 2: the wording here isn't super clear to me.

| _required_  | `versions`           | A list of known [versions](#versions) of the view [1] |
| _required_  | `version-log`        | A list of [version log](#version-log) entries with the timestamp and `version-id` for every change to `current-version-id` |
| _optional_  | `properties`         | A string to string map of view properties [2] |
| _optional_  | `max-staleness-ms`   | The maximum time interval in milliseconds after a refresh operation during which the materialized view's data is considered fresh [3] |

Notes:

1. The number of versions to retain is controlled by the view property: `version.history.num-entries`.
2. Properties are used for metadata such as `comment` and for settings that affect view maintenance. This is not intended to be used for arbitrary metadata.

> 3. The `max-staleness-ms` field only applies to materialized views and must be set to `null` for common views. If `max-staleness-ms` is not `null` and the time elapsed since the last refresh operation is less than `max-staleness-ms`, the query engine may return data directly from the `storage-table` without evaluating freshness based on the source tables and views. If `max-staleness-ms` is `null` for a materialized view, the data in the `storage-table` is always considered fresh.

Reviewer 2: > the time elapsed since the last refresh operation

I think this is not aligned with what we discussed in the meeting. The consensus was the delayed view semantics that Igor brought up.

```
A Materialized View(MV) considered fresh if and only if the precomputed result from the storage table is equivalent to what would have been obtained by running MV's defining query at some point in time within the interval of [CurrentTime - MaxStaleness, CurrentTime]
```

Think about the example from the discussion
```
How should the staleness time be calculated ? 
1. Start from the time when the last refresh operation was started.
2. Start from the earliest snapshot timestamp from any source table with snapshots added after the last MV refresh. 

E.g., let’s assume the config is 60 mins.
10:00 is when the last refresh operation was started.
10:45 is the time when a source table has a new snapshot added.
At 11:15, is the MV still fresh? With option 1, it is stale. With option 2, it is fresh.
```

Current wording is option 1. The delayed view semantics is essentially option 2.

Author: I may have misunderstood Dan's comment at: https://youtu.be/ZdUoeGOltkM?t=623. I thought that he was opposed to the delayed view semantics because some clients might not be able to determine the timestamps of the source table snapshots. But I think he was more referring to their capabilities to actually refresh the data.

| _required_  | `representations`   | A list of [representations](#representations) for the view definition         |
| _optional_  | `default-catalog`   | Catalog name to use when a reference in the SELECT does not contain a catalog |
| _required_  | `default-namespace` | Namespace to use when a reference in the SELECT is a single identifier        |
| _optional_  | `storage-table`   | A [full identifier](#full-identifier) of the storage table |

When `default-catalog` is `null` or not set, the catalog in which the view is stored must be used as the default catalog.

When 'storage-table' is `null` or not set, the entity is a common view, otherwise it is a materialized view.

> 

Author: I didn't see any view or table properties described in the specification. That's why I haven't added any properties yet. 
However, if you feel like we should, it's fine with me.

> 

Reviewer: Given that its up to the engine to use it or not, I'm OK if we don't include this property.

| _required_  | `representations`   | A list of [representations](#representations) for the view definition         |
| _optional_  | `default-catalog`   | Catalog name to use when a reference in the SELECT does not contain a catalog |
| _required_  | `default-namespace` | Namespace to use when a reference in the SELECT is a single identifier        |

> | _optional_  | `storage-table`     | A [storage table identifier](#storage-table-identifier) of the storage table |

Author: In the last sync we talked about the storage table configuration and how query engines have to make sure that certain configuration options from the CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW statement have to be translated into Iceberg table metadata. With that in mind, I think the storage table should be created together with the view. Otherwise you won't be able to store configuration options like partitioning, sorting, ... . The table can be empty at first and populated later.

I will add it to the PR once we have consensus on the behavior.

> | _optional_  | `storage-table`     | A [storage table identifier](#storage-table-identifier) of the storage table |

Reviewer 2: In my mind, it seems natural for the `CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW` DDL to create the view and storage table objects together in the catalog. Just that initially, the storage table will be empty until refresh kicks in. One benefit of this choice is to apply the storage configs (like partition, sort order etc.) from DDL to the storage table. Otherwise, those storage configs would need to be persisted to the view object when executing the DDL.

> | _optional_  | `storage-table`     | A [storage table identifier](#storage-table-identifier) of the storage table |

Reviewer 2: > Is initially empty storage table would be easily distinguishable from recently refreshed but (happened to be) empty (as query retuned nothing) storage tables ? 

This seems straightforward to me. Empty table after refresh would still have `refresh-state` populated with at least `last-refresh-time` even if the `source-state` is empty.

> | _optional_  | `storage-table`     | A [storage table identifier](#storage-table-identifier) of the storage table |

Reviewer 3: makes sense  (we should probably spell it out in the spec)

> | _optional_  | `storage-table`     | A [storage table identifier](#storage-table-identifier) of the storage table |

Reviewer: > Otherwise you won't be able to store configuration options like partitioning, sorting, ..

The storage table configuration isn't the source of truth for the MV configuration.  This configuration is engine specific and an engine may use view properties or something completely external.

>  seems natural for the CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW DDL to create the view and storage table objects together in the catalog.

I don't think the spec should require creating the objects together.  Imagine this sequence of events:

1.  User creates logical view version 1
2. User builds materialization and adds storage table to view version 2
3. User changes view SQL and view schema, removes storage table and commits view version 3
4. User builds new materialization and adds new storage table to view version 4

Basically, I don't see a need to couple the view with the same storage table.

Another reason to not couple:  

For full refresh, the producer can decide whether its more efficient to truncate and rebuild the existing storage table or to create a new storage table and commit that with a new view version.

> | _optional_  | `storage-table`     | A [storage table identifier](#storage-table-identifier) of the storage table |

Reviewer 2: > The storage table configuration isn't the source of truth for the MV configuration. This configuration is engine specific and an engine may use view properties or something completely external.

Storing storage table configs in view properties can also work. I guess it is unlikely to change the engine for MV producer. Hence, interoperability isn't required.

> | _optional_  | `storage-table`     | A [storage table identifier](#storage-table-identifier) of the storage table |

Reviewer 2: @JanKaul isn't line 282 enough?

When `default-catalog` is `null` or not set, the catalog in which the view is stored must be used as the default catalog.

> When `storage-table` is `null` or not set, the entity is a common view, otherwise it is a materialized view. The storage table must be in the same catalog as the materialized view.

Reviewer 8: I agree that generally the MV and storage table will live in the same catalog, but I don't think we need to force that as a requirement.  Just change the 'MUST' to a 'SHOULD' and we leave enough room for implementations to differ.  The main point is that the storage table needs to be addressable (not that it live in the same catalog).

> When `storage-table` is `null` or not set, the entity is a common view, otherwise it is a materialized view. The storage table must be in the same catalog as the materialized view.

Author: At some point we made the decision to restrict it to the same catalog to avoid the catalog alias problem. Consequently the metadata currently doesn't have a "catalog" field. So currently you can't specify a different catalog. So in order to allows for a "SHOULD", we have to also change the metadata.
I think restricting it to the same catalog is a reasonable restriction that makes the usage simpler in many cases.

| _required_  | `representations`   | A list of [representations](#representations) for the view definition         |
| _optional_  | `default-catalog`   | Catalog name to use when a reference in the SELECT does not contain a catalog |
| _required_  | `default-namespace` | Namespace to use when a reference in the SELECT is a single identifier        |

> | _optional_  | `storage-table`     | A [full identifier](#full-identifier) of the storage table |

Author: I thought that a "Full Identifier" is a more general concept that could also be used in other places in the future. For example in the Refresh-state/lineage.

But if people would like to change the name, we can do so.

> | _optional_  | `storage-table`     | A [full identifier](#full-identifier) of the storage table |

Reviewer 2: The table spec doesn't have a term as `full identifier`. we can probably keep it generic as `table identifier`.

This also matches the fact that catalog name may be skipped in the table identifier and use view catalog or default catalog.

> | _optional_  | `storage-table`     | A [full identifier](#full-identifier) of the storage table |

Reviewer 8: I agree with `Table Identifier` as that concept in Iceberg already includes the namespace and table name.

> | _optional_  | `storage-table`     | A [full identifier](#full-identifier) of the storage table |

Author: Just to double check. In a more general setting, the `Identifier` concept could also reference a view. If we go with `Table Identifier` this could either require an additional definition in the future or might be confusing when used for views.

> | _optional_  | `storage-table`     | A [full identifier](#full-identifier) of the storage table |

Reviewer 2: it seems clear to me. not sure why it will be confusing.
```
A table identifier of the storage table
```

> | _optional_  | `storage-table`     | A [full identifier](#full-identifier) of the storage table |

Reviewer 2: @JanKaul can you change the references of "full identifier" to "table identifier" if we agree.

> 

Author: I initially thought of `max-staleness` as a configuration property more than a metadata field. I think we touched on this in the last sync but didn't come to a conclusion.

Anyway, I like your description and I can add it either as a property or a metadata field, if there is consensus.

| _required_  | `representations`   | A list of [representations](#representations) for the view definition         |
| _optional_  | `default-catalog`   | Catalog name to use when a reference in the SELECT does not contain a catalog |
| _required_  | `default-namespace` | Namespace to use when a reference in the SELECT is a single identifier        |

> | _optional_  | `storage-table`     | A [partial identifier](#partial-identifier) of the storage table |

Reviewer 2: I don't know if we should call it `partial`. the storage table identifier can be full and include catalog name.

Author: I had another thought. The REST catalog spec also defines an "Identifier" as namespace and a name. To be consistent here, I would drop the `partial`. But I would not include the catalog_name to stay clear of the mentioned complications.

Reviewer 8: Shouldn't it follow the same conventions for resolution that tables/views follow?  That would be the most consistent approach.

Author: I think there are two parts to this issue: Resolving the namespace and resolving the catalog.

I would always resolve the namespace of the storage table as I think this should provide the most consistency. Requiring the query engine to resolve a partial reference on every access seems more fragile to me. Another point is that the storage table identifier is set by the query engine which has the complete information about the identifier.

Resolving the catalog is more complicated as the discussion about the "catalog alias" problem shows. It makes sense to use an optional "catalog_name" here. The question is what happens if the value is not set. We have these options:
1. Use the same catalog for the storage table as for the view
2. Use the `default-catalog` from the view version (if I understand you correctly Dan)

I'm in favor of Option 1 because my understanding is that the `default-catalog` relates to the references in the view representation and not to the view itself. I find it natural that the storage table is in the same catalog as the view.

When `default-catalog` is `null` or not set, the catalog in which the view is stored must be used as the default catalog.

When 'storage-table' is `null` or not set, the entity is a common view, otherwise it is a materialized view. 

> The catalog of the storage table must be same as the one of the materialized view.

Reviewer 2: I thought the consensus is either the catalog is the same as the one of the MV (implicit), or the catalog name can be specified explicitly too. 

portability across engines is assumed with consistent catalog naming across engines.

Author: I've updated the document accordingly.

Reviewer 6: @stevenzwu @JanKaul @danielcweeks Does this overlap with https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/11365? Can we discuss both in a wholistic way?

| _required_  | `timestamp-ms` | Timestamp when the view's `current-version-id` was updated (ms from epoch) |
| _required_  | `version-id`   | ID that `current-version-id` was set to |

#### Full identifier

The full identifier holds a fully resolved reference for a table or view in the catalog.

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `catalog` | A string specifying the catalog of the source table |
| _required_  | `namespace`   | A list of namespace levels |
| _required_  | `table`   | A string specifying the name of the source table |
| _optional_  | `ref`   | Branch name of the source table that is being referenced in the view query  |

When 'ref' is `null` or not set, it defaults to “main”. This field is to be ignored if the referenced entity is a view.

> ### Materialized View Metadata stored as part of the Table Metadata

Reviewer: Should we include **refresh-start-timestamp-ms** which is when the refresh is triggered and an approximation of the refresh state?

Author: That would work for me.

Author: I'm assuming the motivation here is to have a better approximation compared to the `timestamp-ms` field of the snapshot, which is taken at the end of the refresh operation. Is this correct?

Reviewer: Yes, that's the motivation.  It's a quick way to say that the materialization is at most current time minus refresh-start-timestamp-ms stale.   It would also be useful if the view references non-Iceberg tables

To be able to determine the freshness of the precomputed data, additional metadata is stored as part of the storage table.

For that the additional field "refresh-state" is introduced as an opaque record in the table snapshot summary.

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `refresh-state` | A [refresh state](#refresh-state) record stored as a JSON-encoded string. | 

#### Refresh state

The refresh state record captures the state of all source tables and source views in the fully expanded query tree of the materialized view. It has the following fields:

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `refresh-version-id` | The `version-id` of the materialized view when the refresh operation was performed  | 

> | _required_  | `source-table-states`   | A list of [source table](#soure-table) records  |

Reviewer 2: I have been thinking about if this should be a `list` or a `map`. I guess `list` is probably good since we don't really need lookup capability here. We need to iterate through the sources and compare the satate.

Reviewer 2: Also should we clarify that if the list contains the directly referenced tables only? or recursively referenced tables should be resolved to this list?

Author: Regarding your first point: We agreed to use a record with catalog, namespace and table fields for the identifier. Since JSON only allows String keys and our key is an identifier record, we can't use a map here. But a list suffices for our use case.

Regarding your second point: Yes, very good point, I will add that to the description.

Reviewer: Yes, should clarify its recursively referenced tables and views.

Author: It actually mentions the fully expanded query tree just above in line 201. But I can also add it to the description of the fields.

Reviewer 2: I guess `fully expanded query` wasn't directly clear to me. maybe expand it with one more sentence.

> | _required_  | `source-view-states`   | A list of [source view](#soure-view) records  |

Reviewer 2: I am wondering if this should be merged with the `source-table-states` as a single `source-states` for a list of referenced source tables and views. The only difference btw the two structs are the `id` part: `snapshot-id` vs `version-id`. I guess the benefit of separated list is to make state diff easier. it is a bit different logic to diff table state vs version state.

Reviewer 2: sounds good. I am good with separated lists too

| _required_  | `timestamp-ms` | Timestamp when the view's `current-version-id` was updated (ms from epoch) |
| _required_  | `version-id`   | ID that `current-version-id` was set to |

#### Partial identifier

The partial identifier holds a reference, containing a namespace and a name, of a table or view in the catalog.

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `namespace`   | A list of namespace levels |

> | _required_  | `name`   | A string specifying the name of the source table |

Author: This record is a general partial identifier that can be used to reference tables or views. So name refers to the name of the table or view. 
In the context of the storage table pointer, the name field will contain the name of the storage table. But the record can be more general.

> | _required_  | `name`   | A string specifying the name of the source table |

Reviewer: I think deleting the "source" adjective would be more clear to me too.

### Materialized View Metadata stored as part of the Table Metadata

To be able to determine the freshness of the precomputed data, additional metadata is stored as part of the storage table.

For that the additional field "refresh-state" is introduced as an opaque record in the table snapshot summary.

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `refresh-state` | A [refresh state](#refresh-state) record stored as a JSON-encoded string | 

#### Refresh state

The refresh state record captures the state of all source tables and source views in the fully expanded query tree of the materialized view, including indirect references. It has the following fields:

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `refresh-version-id` | The `version-id` of the materialized view when the refresh operation was performed  | 

> | _required_  | `source-table-states`   | A list of [source table](#soure-table) records for all tables that are directly or indirectly referenced in the materialized view query |

Author: Imagine the Materialized View references a View which in turn references some tables. These tables are indirectly referenced from the MV as they don't directly occur in the query.

> | _required_  | `source-table-states`   | A list of [source table](#soure-table) records for all tables that are directly or indirectly referenced in the materialized view query |

Reviewer 2: maybe it is more clear to change `indirectly` to `transitively`.

| _required_  | `source-view-states`   | A list of [source view](#soure-view) records for all views that are directly or indirectly referenced in the materialized view query |
| _required_  | `refresh-start-timestamp-ms` | A timestamp of when the refresh operation was started |

#### Source table

A source table record captures the state of a source table at the time of the last refresh operation.

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|

> | _required_  | `uuid` | The uuid of the source table | 

Author: Good point. We initially wanted to use identifiers here because of the point you mentioned. However, it turns out that identifiers might not be the same for different query engines because the catalog_name might be different. That's why it's problematic to include identifiers in the specification. 
The current workaround is to get the identifiers by pressing the SQL definition of the materialized view.

> | _required_  | `uuid` | The uuid of the source table | 

Reviewer: @karuppayya There's no plan to have catalog APIs that looks up tables/views by UUID.  I don't think that's a good idea either.

| _required_  | `snapshot-id`   | Snapshot-id of when the last refresh operation was performed |
| _optional_  | `ref` | Branch name of the source table being referenced in the view query |

> When `ref` is `null` or not set, it default to "main".

Reviewer: nit:  default**s**

| _required_  | `timestamp-ms` | Timestamp when the view's `current-version-id` was updated (ms from epoch) |
| _required_  | `version-id`   | ID that `current-version-id` was set to |

#### Partial identifier

The partial identifier holds a reference, containing a namespace and a name, of a table or view in the catalog.

> | Requirement | Field name     | Description |

Author: This is stored as a catalog identifier as the main motivation is to fetch the storage table metadata from the catalog.

Some query engines might implement a full refresh operation by creating a new table. A UUID could lead to a conflict in such scenarios.

Hence, I would leave it out to keep it simple.

- May parse the view definition to implement a more sophisticated policy.
- When a materialized view is considered stale, can fail, refresh inline, or treat the materialized view as a logical view.
- Must not read from the storage table when the materialized view doesn't meet freshness criteria.

**Logical freshness (producer-defined):**

Producers define the logical freshness policy and provide the necessary information in the [refresh state](#refresh-state) to verify the logical equivalence of the precomputed data with the query definition.
Different producers may define different logical freshness policies, based on how much of the dependency graph must be current.
Some require the entire query tree to be fully up to date, while others only require direct children or leaf nodes.
When writing the refresh state, producers:
- Must provide a sufficient list of source states so that consumers can determine freshness according to the producer's policy.
- May leave the source states list empty if the source state cannot be determined for all objects (for example, for non-Iceberg tables).

> - Must store the entry with the oldest snapshot-id or version-id when the same source object appears multiple times in the dependency graph (for example, in diamond patterns).

Reviewer 2: diamond pattern may not be a well known term. we may need to explain the scenario.

#### Refresh state

> The refresh state record captures the dependencies in the materialized view's dependency graph.

Author: I don't exactly know what you mean. Does one of the following interpretations fit you idea?
1. Introduce a "Refresh state" reference below "Storage table metadata" and above "Freshness" and keep the "Refresh state" section below
2. Move the entire "Refresh state" section below the "Storage table metadata" and above the "Freshness" section?

> The refresh state record captures the dependencies in the materialized view's dependency graph.

Reviewer: I'm suggesting to define up front for the reader the terms "Refresh State" and "Dependency Graph" since they are key to understand the spec.  So, under Specification -> Terms, here: https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/11041/changes#diff-4680d52dc70590abc27b56e8da794ddae43ef39ffdd0099b0d6d3802a12eb74fR60  add a new bullet for "Refresh State"  This bullet would go below or above the Storage Table term.

These dependencies include source Iceberg tables, views, and nested materialized views.

The refresh state has the following fields:

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `view-version-id`         | The `version-id` of the materialized view when the refresh operation was performed  |
| _required_  | `source-states`        | A list of [source states](#source-state) records |
| _required_  | `refresh-start-timestamp-ms` | A timestamp of when the refresh operation was started |

#### Source state

Source state records capture the state of objects referenced by a materialized view.
Each record has a `type` field that determines its form:

| Type    | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `table` | An Iceberg table, including storage tables of nested materialized views |
| `view`  | An Iceberg view, including nested materialized views |

> Source materialized views are represented by two source state entries: one for the view itself and one for its storage table.

Reviewer: The binding is not strictly required... in the spirt of not trying to optimize the v1 spec, we don't have to include it.

> Source materialized views are represented by two source state entries: one for the view itself and one for its storage table.

Reviewer 2: agree. I am not sure the MV1 and MV1_table association is needed for consumers.

|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `view-version-id`         | The `version-id` of the materialized view when the refresh operation was performed  |
| _required_  | `source-table-states`        | A list of [source table](#source-table) records for tables directly or indirectly referenced through common views, plus storage tables of directly referenced source materialized views |
| _required_  | `source-view-states`         | A list of [source view](#source-view) records for all views (including materialized views) that are directly referenced, plus common views indirectly referenced through other common views |
| _required_  | `refresh-start-timestamp-ms` | A timestamp of when the refresh operation was started |

#### Source table

A source table record captures the state of a source table (including source MV's storage table) at the time of the last refresh operation.

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `uuid`         | The uuid of the source table |
| _required_  | `snapshot-id`  | Snapshot-id of when the last refresh operation was performed |

> | _optional_  | `ref`          | Branch name of the source table being referenced in the view query |

Reviewer 14: Can we capture source table name in here to load from dummy client ?

When `ref` is `null` or not set, it defaults to "main".

#### Source view

A source view record captures the state of a source view at the time of the last refresh operation.

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `uuid`         | The uuid of the source view |
| _required_  | `version-id`   | Version-id of when the last refresh operation was performed |

#### Status Interpretation

During read time, a materialized view (storage table) can be interpreted as "fresh", "stale" or "invalid", depending on the following situations:

> * **invalid** -- The current `version_id` of the materialized view does not match the `view-version-id` recorded in its refresh state. A read operation cannot proceed using the materialized view's data.

Reviewer 3: this definition creates interestin artifacts 
BASE_TABLE1=>MV1 (SELECT a from BASE_TABLE1) =>MV2 (select a FROM MV1)
 
  we refreshed both MV1 and MV2
  we run ALTER MV statement and added new column to the MV1 definition.  
  at this point MV1 is in invalid while MV2 is valid ( this seem strange / inconsistent)

| _required_  | `timestamp-ms` | Timestamp when the view's `current-version-id` was updated (ms from epoch) |
| _required_  | `version-id`   | ID that `current-version-id` was set to |

#### Storage Table Identifier

The table identifier for the storage table that stores the precomputed results.

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `namespace`    | A list of strings for namespace levels |
| _required_  | `name`         | A string specifying the name of the table |

### Storage table metadata

This section describes additional metadata for the storage table that supplements the regular table metadata and is required for materialized views.
The property "refresh-state" is set on the [snapshot summary](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#snapshots) property of every storage table snapshot to determine the freshness of the precomputed data of the storage table.

| Requirement | Field name      | Description |
|-------------|-----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `refresh-state` | A [refresh state](#refresh-state) record stored as a JSON-encoded string |

> #### Freshness

Reviewer 2: We should add a paragraph to describe possible consumer behavior is a MV is considered stale.
```
- Can fail, or refresh inline, or treat MV as a logical view
- Mustn’t consume from the storage table
```

> A materialized view is considered fresh when its precomputed data is usable by consumers. As tables referenced by a materialized view change over time, the precomputed data may no longer accurately reflect the logical materialized view definition. When this occurs, the materialized view (storage table) is considered stale.

Author: > Suggestion:
> 
> A materialized view is considered fresh when its precomputed data is usable by consumers. As tables **and views** referenced by a materialized view change over time, the precomputed data may no longer accurately **reflect the materialized view's dependency graph**. When this occurs, the materialized view (storage table) is considered stale.

For me "reflect the materialized view's dependency graph" doesn't have the same meaning. In many cases the graph will be the same just that the data at the nodes changed. In my opinion that's not clear in your formulation.

Different systems interpret freshness differently, typically based on the objects referenced in the fully expanded query tree of the materialized view. Some systems consider only direct children, others only leaf nodes, and some the entire query tree. The specific interpretation is determined by the producer of the storage table.

#### Refresh state

The refresh state record captures the state of source tables, views, and materialized views at refresh time. It contains a list of directly or indirectly referenced source states that allow a consumer to determine the freshness of the materialized view.

**Producer responsibilities:**
- The producer of the storage table must provide a sufficient list of source states so that consumers can determine freshness according to the producer's interpretation.
- The source states list may be empty if the source state cannot be determined for all objects (for example, for non-Iceberg tables).

**Consumer evaluation:**
- The consumer must at least perform a coarse-grained evaluation based on `refresh-start-timestamp-ms` and `max-staleness-ms`.

> - The consumer may additionally compare the `source-states` list against the states loaded from the catalog.

Reviewer 2: We probably lack a bit of details here. If the coarse-grained evaluation considered the MV stale and this evaluation considered it fresh, the MV should be considered fresh. But such priority is not expressed here.

- The consumer trusts that the producer has provided all states necessary to determine freshness.

The refresh state has the following fields:

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `view-version-id`         | The `version-id` of the materialized view when the refresh operation was performed  |
| _required_  | `source-states`        | A list of [source states](#source-state) records |
| _required_  | `refresh-start-timestamp-ms` | A timestamp of when the refresh operation was started |

#### Source state

Materialized views can reference source objects of different types, such as Iceberg tables and views. Source state records have a common field `type` that determines the form, which can be one of the following:

* `table`: An Iceberg table

> * `view`: An Iceberg view

Reviewer 2: tied to an open question regarding loading MV from REST catalog. I am wondering if source MV should be one entry in this single list, it can nicely hide the storage table to consumers for access control. but it could be a problem for non REST catalog

| Requirement | Field name      | Description |
|-------------|-----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `refresh-state` | A [refresh state](#refresh-state) record stored as a JSON-encoded string |

#### Freshness

A materialized view's precomputed data becomes stale as the tables and views referenced in its query definition change over time. Freshness determines whether the precomputed data accurately represents the logical query definition at the current state of its dependencies.

Different systems define freshness differently, based on how much of the dependency graph must be current. Some require the entire query tree to be fully up to date, while others only require direct children or allow bounded staleness at leaf nodes. As a result, "fresh" can mean strict end-to-end consistency, acceptable lag, or policy/version compliance.

A materialized view is considered fresh when its precomputed data meets the freshness criteria defined by the consumer's evaluation policy. When these criteria are not met, the materialized view is considered stale.

#### Refresh state

> The refresh state record captures the unique dependencies in the materialized view's dependency graph. These dependencies include source Iceberg tables, views, and nested materialized views that allow a consumer to determine the freshness of the materialized view.

Reviewer 3: "unique dependencies" seem to indicate that either diamond pattern of queries is not supported or there is a policy to choose which instance of dependency to be selected if the same table queried multiple times ( indirectly through different upstream MVs at different points in time)  
to p[roperly support this we probable need to store optional query  path in each entry  of refresh state

| _required_  | `timestamp-ms` | Timestamp when the view's `current-version-id` was updated (ms from epoch) |
| _required_  | `version-id`   | ID that `current-version-id` was set to |

#### Storage Table Identifier

The table identifier for the storage table that stores the precomputed results.

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `namespace`    | A list of strings for namespace levels |
| _required_  | `name`         | A string specifying the name of the table |

### Storage table metadata

This section describes additional metadata for the storage table that supplements the regular table metadata and is required for materialized views.
The `refresh-state` property is set on the [snapshot summary](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#snapshots) property of a storage table snapshot to provide information about the state of the precomputed data.

| Requirement | Field name      | Description |
|-------------|-----------------|-------------|
| _optional_  | `refresh-state` | A [refresh state](#refresh-state) record stored as a JSON-encoded string |

#### Freshness

> A materialized view is **fresh** when the storage table represents the result of the current view query.

Reviewer: **Proposal:**

However, consumers may still use a stale storage table based on its evaluation of the refresh state.

Author: What do you think about: 

However, consumers may still decide to consume from a stale storage table based on their own policies.

This way we don't use refresh-state before it's defined.

Reviewer: I'm OK with that too.

> A change to the materialized view's definition produces a new `view-version-id`; any storage-table snapshot recorded at a prior `view-version-id` is not fresh under the current definition.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
A change to the materialized view's definition produces a new `view-version-id`; any storage-table snapshot recorded at a prior `view-version-id` is not fresh and should not be consumed until refreshed.
```

#### Refresh state

> The refresh state record captures the state of dependencies that the producer chose to track from the materialized view's dependency graph. A dependency is recorded in `source-states` as either a `table` entry (a source table or an upstream materialized view's storage table) and/or a `view` entry. Upstream materialized views can be stored as a `view` and a `table` entry.

Reviewer 2: my earlier comment about the term `source-table` is also problematic here. it would imply a table entry is only a directly referenced table or MV's storage table.

The refresh state has the following fields:

| Requirement | Field name                   | Description |
|-------------|------------------------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `view-version-id`            | The `version-id` of the materialized view when the refresh operation was performed |
| _required_  | `source-states`              | A list of [source state](#source-state) records |
| _required_  | `refresh-start-timestamp-ms` | A timestamp of when the refresh operation was started |

##### Producer: Recording Refresh State

Producers may selectively choose a subset of their dependencies to record — for example, skipping non-Iceberg sources or recording an empty list. See [Appendix B](#appendix-b-what-counts-as-a-dependency) for strategies on how to store dependency state.

When writing the refresh state, producers:

- **Must** record `view-version-id` and `refresh-start-timestamp-ms`.

> - **Should** include all distinct source states for the inputs they chose to track (diamond dependency pattern).

Reviewer 3: (diamond dependency pattern). reads like a TODO that wasn't addressed was it meant to be here ?

Author: That if a table is referenced through multiple dependency paths, like in the diamond pattern, all of its distinct source states have to be recorded. In case different snapshots are referenced.

- **May** leave `source-states` empty (e.g., when sources are non-Iceberg or freshness is determined by a mechanism outside this spec).

##### Consumer: Evaluating Refresh State

> Consumers may use any combination of the following to assess the freshness of the storage table:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Consumers may use any combination of the following to assess the state of dependencies used to produce the storage table.
```

This line introduces the issue of multiple definitions of "freshness".  We need to relax this.

- **Recency policy.** Accept the storage table when `refresh-start-timestamp-ms` falls within a staleness window. A recency policy bounds data age but does not establish freshness.
- **Trust the recorded `source-states`.** Compare each entry against the current catalog state — `snapshot-id` for tables, `version-id` for views, optionally recursive verification for source materialized views recorded by their storage tables. Also confirm that the recorded `view-version-id` equals the materialized view's current `view-version-id`.
- **Verify by parsing the view query.** Derive the dependency set from the SQL and confirm every dependency is covered by `source-states` and matches the current state. Treat any uncovered dependency as undetermined.

If a consumer's assessment passes, it reads from the storage table. If not, the consumer may fail the query, evaluate the view query directly, or apply another strategy.

#### Source state

Source state records capture the state of objects referenced by a materialized view. Each record has a `type` field that determines its form:

| Type    | Description |
|---------|-------------|

> | `table` | An Iceberg table — either a source table in the dependency graph, or the storage table of a source materialized view |

Reviewer 7: If table can be a BASE table or a STORAGE table, how are we distinguishing between the two?

| `view`  | An Iceberg view in the dependency graph |

> An upstream materialized view may be recorded as a `view` entry referencing its view metadata and one ore more `table` entries referencing its storage table or other source tables. These source table entries might be determined by recursively expanding its own dependencies.

Reviewer 3: nit: "Recording an upstream materialized view may be recorded as its view metadata and/or its storage tables and/or any other tables discovered by recursively expanding the view’s dependencies."

| _required_  | `timestamp-ms` | Timestamp when the view's `current-version-id` was updated (ms from epoch) |
| _required_  | `version-id`   | ID that `current-version-id` was set to |

#### Storage Table Identifier

The table identifier for the storage table that stores the precomputed results.

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `namespace`    | A list of strings for namespace levels |
| _required_  | `name`         | A string specifying the name of the table |

### Storage table metadata

This section describes additional metadata for the storage table that supplements the regular table metadata and is required for materialized views.
The property "refresh-state" is set on the [snapshot summary](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#snapshots) property of every storage table snapshot to determine the freshness of the precomputed data of the storage table.

| Requirement | Field name      | Description |
|-------------|-----------------|-------------|

> | _required_  | `refresh-state` | A [refresh state](#refresh-state) record stored as a JSON-encoded string |

Reviewer 3: based on example below i think it needs to be optional

#### Freshness

A materialized view is "fresh" when the storage table adequately represents the logical query definition of the view.
Since different systems define freshness differently, it is left to the consumer to evaluate freshness based on its own policy.

**Consumer behavior:**

When evaluating freshness, consumers:

> - May apply time-based freshness policies, such as allowing a staleness window based on `refresh-start-timestamp-ms`.

Reviewer 15: We need an empty line after L206. 

<img width="849" height="199" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3ebee06d-37d6-4365-b941-ec08be0c70a7" />

Author: Thanks!

> A materialized view is **fresh** when the storage table represents the result of the current view query (at the materialized view's current `view-version-id`) over the current state of its dependencies. Dependencies are determined by parsing the SQL: base Iceberg tables, Iceberg views (whose own dependencies are transitively dependencies of the materialized view), and intermediate materialized views (treated as their storage tables, with their own freshness established recursively from their `refresh-state`).

Reviewer 8: We're over specifying here.  This statement is now defining how state must be calculated, not just what we consider 'fresh' to mean.  I would get rid of the second sentence because we do not need to define the rest.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
A materialized view is **fresh** when the storage table represents the result of the current view query (at the materialized view's current `view-version-id`) over the current state of its dependencies. Dependencies are any resolved relation referenced while evaluating the view query.
```

> The `refresh-state` summary on each storage-table snapshot records dependency state observed at refresh time. Producers populate it; consumers use it to assess freshness without re-executing the query. The spec does not mandate what producers record or how consumers assess. See [Appendix B](#appendix-b-what-counts-as-a-dependency) for what counts as a dependency.

Reviewer 16: If the `refresh-state` is to be filled arbitrarily by the producers, what is the rationale of mentioning it in the spec?

It feels counter-intuitive to add extensive details on how to fill the `refresh-state` and also to say that the producers may well choose to skip writing it.

In any case, we should have a  good rationale on WHY would the producers convene to a "standardized" way of specifying the refresh state information for the MV. 

In which situation would a consumer benefit of the details _optionally_ stored in the `refresh-state` summary? Knowing that the MV may be stale, what would the consumer be doing with this information?

Reviewer: There are too many different use cases for freshness requirements.  Producer decides the full set of possibilities based on what it puts into the refresh state.  Consumer has the flexibility to decide if the included refresh state is sufficient for its freshness requirement.

> The `refresh-state` summary on each storage-table snapshot records dependency state observed at refresh time. Producers populate it; consumers use it to assess freshness without re-executing the query. The spec does not mandate what producers record or how consumers assess. See [Appendix B](#appendix-b-what-counts-as-a-dependency) for what counts as a dependency.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The `refresh-state` record in each storage-table snapshot records dependency state observed at refresh time. Consumers may use the state information to assess freshness without re-executing the query. See [Appendix B](#appendix-b-what-counts-as-a-dependency) for what counts as a dependency.
```

I think we need to work on the wording here.

> ##### Producer flexibility

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
##### Recording Refresh State
```

Reviewer: I can see how this heading has parallel structure with the next heading so how about:

- Producer: Recording Refresh State
- Consumer:  Evaluating Refresh State

Producers may selectively choose a subset of their dependencies to record — for example, skipping non-Iceberg sources or recording an empty list.

When writing the refresh state, producers:

- **Must** record `view-version-id` and `refresh-start-timestamp-ms`.

> - **Must** include all distinct source states for the inputs they chose to track.

Reviewer 2: this `must` seems a little weird to me. It seems to saying the same thing as "Producers may selectively choose a subset of their dependencies to record". I would be good to just remove this item.

> - **May** leave `source-states` empty (e.g., when sources are non-Iceberg or freshness is determined by a mechanism outside this spec).

Reviewer 2: this could also be the case if the MV is considered always fresh/consumer like the Postgres semantics. should we spell that out too?

Author: Isn't that spelled out by the empty list in the sentence above?

> A snapshot whose refresh state violates a `Must` rule is invalid; consumers may treat it as if it had no `refresh-state`.

Reviewer 2: If the producer is not spec compliant, should consumers treat the MV as invalid and not consumable?

Reviewer: Agree here too.

> ##### Consumer options

Reviewer: Consumer:  Evaluating Refresh State

to match with **Producer: Recording Refresh State**

> Consumers may use any combination of the following to assess the storage table:

Reviewer 2: nit: `assess the storage table` --> `assess the freshness of the storage table`

> - May leave the source states list empty if the source state cannot be determined for all objects (for example, for non-Iceberg tables).

Reviewer 3: do we need to relax it ? 
i was under impression that we have agreed that sorce state being empty could be artifact of producer's policy ( not neccessary inability to determine non-iceberg state : 

----
May leave the source states list empty if the source state cannot be determined for all objects (for example, for non-Iceberg tables).
----
May leave the source states list empty if producer does not expect any client freshness interpretation or the source state cannot be determined for all objects (for example, for non-Iceberg tables).
----

Author: I made a new proposition. I would like to avoid the term "client freshness interpretation" because in my opinion a producer cannot know the clients interpretation.

> - **Recency policy.** Accept the storage table when `refresh-start-timestamp-ms` falls within a staleness window. A recency policy bounds data age but does not establish freshness.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- **Refresh Staleness.** Accept the storage table when `refresh-start-timestamp-ms` falls within a staleness window. Staleness bounds data age but does not establish freshness.
```

Reviewer: I like "Recency Policy".  "Refresh Staleness" feels less clear to me.

Reviewer 3: NIT: "Recency" doesn't seem to be a common term used by the DBs ( commonly used terms are staleness , freshness ,lag ) . Unless we are trying to make point that is somehow a distinct feature I would prefer not to use an "uncommon" term here

Author: I agree with Igor that we should generally try to reuse existing terms.

- **Trust the recorded `source-states`.** Compare each entry against the current catalog state — `snapshot-id` for tables, `version-id` for views, optionally recursive verification for intermediate materialized views recorded by their storage tables. Also confirm that the recorded `view-version-id` equals the materialized view's current `view-version-id`.
- **Verify by parsing the view query.** Derive the dependency set from the SQL and confirm every dependency is covered by `source-states` and matches the current state. Treat any uncovered dependency as undetermined.

> If a consumer's assessment passes, it reads from the storage table; otherwise it evaluates the view query in place of the storage table.

Reviewer 2: this wording restricts the consumer behavior to `evaluate the view query`. In the past we discussed a few valid behaviors.

* evaluate the view query (like a logical view)
* calculate incremental result and merge with the MV storage table // BigQuery does sth similar
* fail

Reviewer: I agree... let's not prescribe the "otherwise" part.

Reviewer 2: or describe (but not limited to) some valid behaviors. the current wording can imply a single valid behavior.

#### Refresh state

The refresh state record captures the dependencies in the materialized view's dependency graph. Each dependency is recorded in `source-states` as either a `table` entry (a base table or an intermediate materialized view's storage table) or a `view` entry.

The refresh state has the following fields:

| Requirement | Field name                   | Description |
|-------------|------------------------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `view-version-id`            | The `version-id` of the materialized view when the refresh operation was performed |
| _required_  | `source-states`              | A list of [source state](#source-state) records |
| _required_  | `refresh-start-timestamp-ms` | A timestamp of when the refresh operation was started |

#### Source state

Source state records capture the state of objects referenced by a materialized view. Each record has a `type` field that determines its form:

| Type    | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `table` | An Iceberg table — either a base table in the dependency graph, or the storage table of an intermediate materialized view |
| `view`  | An Iceberg view in the dependency graph |

> An intermediate materialized view must be recorded as a single `table` entry referencing its storage table; recording it as a `view` entry is not permitted. The intermediate materialized view's own dependencies are reached recursively through its `refresh-state`.

Reviewer 2: > An intermediate materialized view must be recorded as a single `table` entry referencing its storage table

`must` could be interpreted that a nested MV must be recorded in the source-state, which contradicts with earlier statement that producers can choose any subset.

> recording it as a `view` entry is not permitted

A nested MV should also have a view entry, right? if the nested MV's view definition changed, the source state can be used to detect the version mismatch

When `ref` is `null` or not set, it defaults to `main`.

#### Source view state

A source view record captures the state of a source view at the time of the last refresh operation.

| Requirement | Field name   | Description |
|-------------|--------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `type`       | A string that must be set to `view` |
| _required_  | `name`       | A string specifying the name of the source view |
| _required_  | `namespace`  | A list of strings for namespace levels |
| _optional_  | `catalog`    | An optional name of the catalog. If not set, the catalog is the same as the materialized view's |
| _required_  | `uuid`       | The uuid of the source view |
| _required_  | `version-id` | The version-id of the source view that was read during the refresh operation |

#### Storage table creation and configuration

When processing a `CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW` statement, query engines must:

1. Create the storage table as a regular Iceberg table with any specified configurations (partitioning, sort order, compression, etc.).
2. Create the materialized view metadata with a `storage-table` reference pointing to the created storage table.

> The storage table must exist and be accessible before the materialized view metadata is committed.

Reviewer 2: nit: `before` may be a bit strict. they can be committed in the same transaction

- Should not consume the storage table as it is when the materialized view doesn't meet the freshness criteria.

**Producer behavior:**

Producers should provide the necessary information in the [refresh state](#refresh-state) such that consumers can verify the logical equivalence of the precomputed data with the query definition.
Different producers may have different freshness interpretations, based on how much of the refresh state's dependency graph should be evaluated.
Some producers expect the entire dependency graph to be evaluated and therefore include source MV dependencies. Other producers may only expect dependencies in the MV's SQL to be evaluated and therefore do not include dependencies of source MVs.

When writing the refresh state, producers:

- Should provide a sufficient list of source states such that consumers can determine freshness according to the producer's intent. If the producers intent is such that it doesn't rely on the source-states to determine freshness, it may provide an empty list.
- If the source state cannot be determined for all objects (for example, for non-Iceberg tables) may leave the source states list empty.

> - If a stored object is reachable through multiple paths in the dependency graph (diamond dependency pattern), all distinct source states have to be included in the list.

Reviewer: Case C is what I think we agreed on (during 4/2's sync) to be the default behavior in Spark. Case B is really an optimization of Case C since the consumer could recursively fetch the refresh state for the MV tables and combine them together.

I think we are trying to improve the case where consumer doesn't parse SQL and has enough information to decide whether it can use the MV's storage table or not.

The producer could include the following information into the refresh state to help this consumer:

- used-source-mvs: boolean - Whether the refresh used source materialized view(s).
- expanded-source-mvs:  boolean - Whether the refresh state expanded source materialized view(s).  (i.e.  case B or case C)
- contains-non-iceberg-sources:  boolean - Whether the materialized view's SQL included non-Iceberg sources

This information is easy for the producer to write into the refresh state and helps convey freshness intent.  A non-SQL parsing consumer could have a requirement that it can only use MVs that refresh with other MVs as long as it can deeply validate all dependencies (i.e. used-source-mvs=true, expanded-source-mvs=true and contains-non-iceberg-tables=false).

> - If a stored object is reachable through multiple paths in the dependency graph (diamond dependency pattern), all distinct source states have to be included in the list.

Author: I agree with Walaa and Benny in that the consumer has no signal at all whether the list is expanded or is including non-iceberg sources. So if a consumer wants to provide certain freshness guarantees it is actually forced to parse the SQL to ensure it doesn't contain a non-iceberg source for example. By just looking at the list, there is no way of telling that only iceberg tables were used and the state is sufficient.

I was talking with Walaa and we identified that there are actually at least two different dimensions mangled into the current design of the source-states list. These are:
1. Iceberg vs Non-Iceberg tables
2. Deep vs shallow nesting
I think it would be valuable if we could provide enough information to the consumer to distinguish between them and maybe even provide more information.

**Potential solutions**:

1. Iceberg vs Non-Iceberg
We could include source states of the `type: external` that only contain the identifier of the source table. This way references to Non-Iceberg tables are at least recorded in the refresh-state and the consumer knows about it. If no entry with `type: external` is present, the consumer knows that it's all iceberg tables and it is able to determine the freshness.

2. Deep vs shallow nesting
I think including a single boolean flag: "expanded-source-mvs" provides value to the consumer to know about the producers freshness interpretation. The consumer can than decide whether the list is enough or whether it would like to parse the SQL and expand the list. But without the flag it would need to parse the SQL to even figure out whether the producer provided and deep or shallow nested list.
Flags can come across as "Tech-debt" or that parts haven't been defined precisely. But I think this is not the case here as there are actually two ways to go about the nesting. And I think it makes sense for the producer to store that information and communicate it to the consumer.

| _required_  | `refresh-start-timestamp-ms` | A timestamp of when the refresh operation was started |

#### Source state

Source state records capture the state of objects referenced by a materialized view including objects referenced by source materialized views.
Each record has a `type` field that determines its form:

| Type    | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `table` | An Iceberg table, including storage tables of source materialized views |
| `view`  | An Iceberg view, including source materialized views |

Source materialized views are represented by two source state entries: one for the view itself and one for its storage table.

#### Source table state

A source table record captures the state of a source table (including source MV's storage table) at the time of the last refresh operation.

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `type`         | A string that must be set to `table` |
| _required_  | `name`         | A string specifying the name of the source table |
| _required_  | `namespace`    | A list of strings for namespace levels |

> | _optional_  | `catalog`      | An optional name of the catalog. If not set, the catalog is the same as the materialized views' |

Reviewer 6: @JanKaul @bennychow What is the resolution to this issue? @danielcweeks FYI.

> | _optional_  | `catalog`      | An optional name of the catalog. If not set, the catalog is the same as the materialized views' |

Author: The spec says:
```
| _optional_  | `catalog`     | An optional name of the catalog. If not set, the catalog is the same as the materialized view's |
```

So if the catalog entry is null, it defaults to the materialized view's catalog and not the `default-catalog` from the view. The engine that refreshes the MV will fully resolve all the identifiers, but in case the catalog-name is the same as the MV's catalog-name, it is not required to include it in the source-states.

That said, I'm okay with requiring fully resolved identifiers in the source-states. It was just a measure to solve the "catalog alias" problem at the time.

| _required_  | `uuid`         | The uuid of the source table |

> | _required_  | `snapshot-id`  | The snapshot-id of the source table that was read during the refresh operation |

Reviewer 8: Referring back to the discussion from today's sync, I'm concerned `snapshot-id` is not sufficient to capture state when there are multiple references to the same table.

For example, If I have the following reference:
```json
 {"type":"table", "namespace": ["N"], "name": "A", "snapshot-id": 312323934}
```

You might assume that `312323934` was the current table state, but it could also represent the stat of an `version as of` with either time or a specific identifier in the sql text.

If I have multiple references:
```json
 {"type":"table", "namespace": ["N"], "name": "A", "snapshot-id": 312323934}
 {"type":"table", "namespace": ["N"], "name": "A", "snapshot-id": 744837227}
```

It may not be possible to know specifically which might be `current` vs a `version as of`.  In one case, you need to validate the current snapshot of the table and in the other, you just need to validate that it exists.

| _required_  | `timestamp-ms` | Timestamp when the view's `current-version-id` was updated (ms from epoch) |
| _required_  | `version-id`   | ID that `current-version-id` was set to |

#### Storage Table Identifier

The table identifier for the storage table that stores the precomputed results.

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `namespace`    | A list of strings for namespace levels |
| _required_  | `name`         | A string specifying the name of the table |

> 

Reviewer 2: This field separates logical view (current) with materialized view. MV has this extra field that establishes the connection. Otherwise, how do we know the storage table is associated with the view?

When the storage table should be exposed in the REST catalog is out of the scope of the MV spec. catalog can  choose to skip storage tables for list tables call for consumers. MV producer would still need to be able to load and update the storage table in the catalog.

There is this problem of number of round trips for loading view or MV in REST spec
* loading a logical view requires 2 round trips: (1) load table - failed (2) load view
* load a MV requires 3 round trips with current REST spec: (1) load table -failed (2) load view (3) load storage table

I am working on a proposal of universal load endpoint for relational objects: table, view, materialized view. One round trip should be able to load all 3 types of relational objects. I probably can share next week.

- Should not consume the storage table as it is when the materialized view doesn't meet the freshness criteria.

**Producer behavior:**

Producers should provide the necessary information in the [refresh state](#refresh-state) such that consumers can verify the logical equivalence of the precomputed data with the query definition.
Different producers may have different freshness interpretations, based on how much of the refresh state's dependency graph should be evaluated.
Some producers expect the entire dependency graph to be evaluated and therefore include source MV dependencies. Other producers may only expect dependencies in the MV's SQL to be evaluated and therefore do not include dependencies of source MVs.

When writing the refresh state, producers:

- Should provide a sufficient list of source states such that consumers can determine freshness according to the producer's interpretation. If the producers interpretation is such that it doesn't rely on the source-states to determine freshness, it may provide an empty list.
- If the source state cannot be determined for all objects (for example, for non-Iceberg tables) may leave the source states list empty.

> - If a stored object is reachable through multiple paths in the dependency graph (diamond dependency pattern), the entry with the oldest snapshot-id or version-id must be stored.

Reviewer 2: for freshness evaluation, I don't see the benefit or value of storing two versions of the same table. Doesn't really matter if the snapshot has expired or not. If the table snapshot in the refresh-state and the latest data-changing snapshot from catalog are different, then consumers can consider the storage table stale. For that purpose, the oldest snapshot would suffice.

On the other hand, I also don't see a strong reason to block such behavior. Original I thought the producer needs to update just one entry and hence would need lineage information to distinguish the entries. During today's meeting, this will not be an issue as long as producers update both entries together.

| _required_  | `timestamp-ms` | Timestamp when the view's `current-version-id` was updated (ms from epoch) |
| _required_  | `version-id`   | ID that `current-version-id` was set to |

> #### Full identifier

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
#### Table Identifier
```

Reviewer 8: (also update all other `full identifier` references to `table identifier`)

> #### Table Identifier

Reviewer 2: nit: let's call it `Storage table identifier` and update the reference link

> The table identifier holds a reference, containing a namespace and a name, of a table or view in the catalog.

Reviewer 2: maybe simplified as
```
The table identifier for the storage table that stores the precomputed results.
```

also `the catalog` is probably not the most accurate, as it can be interpreted as the same catalog as the view definition.

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|

> | _optional_  | `catalog`      | A string specifying the name of the catalog. If set to `null`, the catalog is the same as the views' catalog |

Author: Thank you!

> | _required_  | `namespace`    | A list of namespace levels |

Reviewer 2: nit: `A list of strings for namespace levels`

| _required_  | `name`         | A string specifying the name of the table/view |

> ### Materialized View Metadata stored as part of the Table Metadata

Reviewer 2: we need to think about how to organize this more clearly. we need to make it abundantly clear that this is for table metadata. also the section title is too long.

Maybe call this section `Storage table metadata` to match the `View metadata` section name at the same level.

> A property "refresh-state" is set on the table [snapshot summary](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#snapshots) to determine the freshness of the precomputed data of the storage table.

Reviewer 2: maybe add a clarifying sentence before the `refresh-state` sentence. e.g.
```
This section describes additional metadata for storage table that are required for materialized views.
```

I am also wondering if this should be added to the `Table spec`. we can add a link from the MV spec page here.

| Requirement | Field name      | Description |
|-------------|-----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `refresh-state` | A [refresh state](#refresh-state) record stored as a JSON-encoded string | 

#### Refresh state

The refresh state record captures the state of all source tables and source views in the fully expanded query tree of the materialized view, including indirect references. Indirect references are the tables/views that are not directly referenced in the query but are nested within other views. The refresh state has the following fields:

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|

> | _required_  | `refresh-version-id`         | The `version-id` of the materialized view when the refresh operation was performed  | 

Reviewer 2: maybe `view-verision-id`?

> The refresh state record captures the state of all source tables, views, and materialized views in the materialized view's fully expanded query tree at refresh time. Source table states are stored in `source-table-states` and source view states in `source-view-states`. For source views, `source-view-states` includes indirect references — tables or views nested within other views but not directly referenced in the query. For source materialized views, both the source view and its storage table are included in the refresh state. Indirect references are excluded for materialized view sources; query engines may recursively expand the query tree to determine freshness. The refresh state has the following fields:

Reviewer 2: > For source views, `source-view-states` includes indirect references — tables or views nested within other views but not directly referenced in the query.

Should we clarify as
```
tables or views nested within other views but not directly referenced in the query.
-->
views nested within other views (excluding MVs) that are not directly referenced in the query
```
-------------------------------

nit: move `For source materialized view, ...` to a separate paragraph to highlight the special clarification for source MV?

-------------------------------

query engines may recursively expand the query tree to determine freshness
->
during read time, query engines may recursively expand the query tree to determine freshness

| _required_  | `source-table-states`        | A list of [source table](#source-table) records for all tables that are directly or indirectly referenced in the materialized view query |

> | _required_  | `source-view-states`         | A list of [source view](#source-view) records for all views that are directly or indirectly referenced in the materialized view query |

Author: We don't necessarily need to differentiate between them. But since the variables `snapshot-id` and `version-id`, that capture the current state of a source entity, are named differently for tables and views, it's clearer to separate them.

At some point we had a proposal that introduced a `revision-id` to refer to `snapshot-id` and `version-id` but the consensus was that separating it is clearer.

| _required_  | `refresh-start-timestamp-ms` | A timestamp of when the refresh operation was started |

#### Source table

A source table record captures the state of a source table at the time of the last refresh operation.

> | Requirement | Field name     | Description |

Reviewer 2: just want to call out a discussion point if we want to include the table identifier fields for readability
- catalog (optional)
- database (optional)
- table (required)

Author: As I said on the mailing list, I don't have a strong opinion about this issue. I was hesitant to add it because I wanted to resolve the discussion with Walaa first. I think he might be skeptical about including the table identifier here.

Reviewer 5: If i understand correctly @wmoustafa comment on the mailing list, then there is some ambiguity here for what to put, if the same table in expressed in the various forms (catalog.database.name) or (database.name) or (name), either in same sql statement or in the different sql representations of the same view.  @stevenzwu  i wonder do we dictate a standard to follow in this case?

Reviewer 2: This is not a blocker for me. Functionally, it is not required. I just thought the refresh state would be more human friendly if names (like database and name) are added.

Reviewer: I think any ambiguity we have with table identifiers in the refresh state we will have with the view's storage table.  Its probably best to leave the table identifiers out of the refresh state and not contribute to more view interoperability problems.

> A source table record captures the state of a source table at the time of the last refresh operation.

Reviewer 2: the state of a source table (including source MV's storage table)?

| _required_  | `timestamp-ms` | Timestamp when the view's `current-version-id` was updated (ms from epoch) |
| _required_  | `version-id`   | ID that `current-version-id` was set to |

#### Storage Table Identifier

The table identifier for the storage table that stores the precomputed results.

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|

> | _optional_  | `catalog`      | A string specifying the name of the catalog. If set to `null`, the catalog is the same as the view's catalog |

Reviewer 13: What are some reasons why the catalog and namespace should not be inherited from the MV's catalog and namespace?

IIUC the proposal allows:

- catalog1.ns1.source_table (source table)
- catalog2.ns2.mv (materialized view)
  - catalog3.ns3.storage_table (storage table)

Author: I agree with you that it's not a good idea to store the storage table in another catalog than the materialized view. My initial proposal didn't include the catalog. This would also get us around the issues with the "catalog alias" problem.

But I think some comments wanted to include the catalog. (I can't find it though)

I think having a dedicated namespace for all storage tables might be a use case for having a different namespace than the materialized view.

Reviewer 13: Having a dedicated namespace makes sense. A separate catalog is what I can't think of a use for personally. If you can find the comments it would be helpful.

(I'm not asking for a change, as a person who has to possibly implement this downstream in engines I was thinking about use-cases).

Reviewer 11: +1 on avoid a different `catalog` field that may introduce engine interoperability challenges that I personally feel quite unnecessary, unless there's a strong use case

| _required_  | `namespace`    | A list of strings for namespace levels |

> | _required_  | `name`         | A string specifying the name of the table/view |

Reviewer 11: sorry I'm late to this discussion and this might be discussed/could be a stupid question - do we think if it's worth also include the snapshot id of the storage table, so that under circumstances where the storage table was updated but the materialized view was not or vice versa (race condition or commit partial succeeded), there's a reference link in both way (I know storage table already points to view version id under "refresh state"), which might be useful especially when view/table undergo version upgrades that could result in e.g. schema mismatch between the view and the underlying storage table?

Author: The current spec is designed such that the materialized view does not need to be updated when the storage table is updated. When the materialized view is refreshed only the storage table is updated. The idea is that the definition of the materialized view is still correct after the refresh.
However, if the materialized view is updated, the storage table should be in the `invalid` state. That's why the `view-version` is stored as part of the `refresh-state`. When the materialized view is updated, it cannot be known if the data in the storage table is still correct. That's why a full refresh has to be performed for an `invalid` state.

> ### Storage table metadata

Reviewer 2: resurface a comment which might have been missed because it was combined with another minor comment. this is actually probably a little bigger decision. 

should this whole section be added to the `Table Spec` page? we can add cross references btw the `Table Spec` and `View Spec` pages

Author: I remember Dan saying that he would like to keep the Table spec clear of any MV structures. And I think it's good that all MV related information can be found in one place.

But I don't have a strong opinion on this and we could move it to the table spec.

Reviewer 2: I am not too opinionated on this either. At least, I was wondering if this has been discussed and what does the community favor. 

I remember from previous discussion @wmoustafa  also favored all MV related info in one page. I can definitely understand why. We can keep it here.

Reviewer 11: I wonder if it's still worth mentioning the fields that are only applicable to materialized view in appendix of table spec, e.g.  https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#optional-snapshot-summary-fields and link to this page, so it is still searchable in the table spec page

Reviewer 9: I support linking from Table => MV for this. I don't know if the information needs to be in both places

Author: I think a link is a great idea but I also agree that I would duplicate the information.

Reviewer 2: @JanKaul can you add the link from table to this MV storage table section?

This section describes additional metadata for the storage table that supplements the regular table metadata and is required for materialzied views.

> The property "refresh-state" is set on the table [snapshot summary](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#snapshots) to determine the freshness of the precomputed data of the storage table.

Reviewer 9: Each "snapshot" has it's own refresh-state correct? I'm not sure it's clear in this sentence.

| Requirement | Field name      | Description |
|-------------|-----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `refresh-state` | A [refresh state](#refresh-state) record stored as a JSON-encoded string | 

#### Refresh state

> The refresh state record captures the state of all source tables and source views in the fully expanded query tree of the materialized view, including indirect references. Indirect references are the tables/views that are not directly referenced in the query but are nested within other views. The refresh state has the following fields:

Reviewer: When an engine builds or refreshes the materialization, they should have the fully expanded query tree of the MV.  Its easy for an engine to just write out the table snapshot ids and view version ids at that time.

> The refresh state record captures the state of all source tables and source views in the fully expanded query tree of the materialized view, including indirect references. Indirect references are the tables/views that are not directly referenced in the query but are nested within other views. The refresh state has the following fields:

Reviewer 9: Fully expanded here means fully resolved? Ie we shouldn't have any views here at all correct? It should just be a list of source tables?

> The refresh state record captures the state of all source tables and source views in the fully expanded query tree of the materialized view, including indirect references. Indirect references are the tables/views that are not directly referenced in the query but are nested within other views. The refresh state has the following fields:

Reviewer: Fully expanded means identifiers validated/resolved but also means views are expanded (and even UDFs and SQL based access control policies).  The result of expansion is more than just a list of tables.  We also need a list of views and the versions of each view as the view version ids need to be captured in the refresh state.

| _required_  | `timestamp-ms` | Timestamp when the view's `current-version-id` was updated (ms from epoch) |
| _required_  | `version-id`   | ID that `current-version-id` was set to |

#### Storage Table Identifier

The table identifier for the storage table that stores the precomputed results.

| Requirement | Field name     | Description |
|-------------|----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `namespace`    | A list of strings for namespace levels |

> | _required_  | `name`         | A string specifying the name of the table/view |

Reviewer 12: in this case (Storage Table Identifier). this is always a table , and nvere  a view . Right?   
   
```suggestion
| _required_  | `name`         | A string specifying the name of the table |
```

### Storage table metadata

This section describes additional metadata for the storage table that supplements the regular table metadata and is required for materialized views.
The property "refresh-state" is set on the [snapshot summary](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#snapshots) property of every storage table snapshot to determine the freshness of the precomputed data of the storage table.

| Requirement | Field name      | Description |
|-------------|-----------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `refresh-state` | A [refresh state](#refresh-state) record stored as a JSON-encoded string |

#### Refresh state

> The refresh state record captures the state of all source tables, views, and materialized views in the materialized view's fully expanded query tree at refresh time. Source table states are stored in `source-table-states` and source view states in `source-view-states`. For source views, `source-view-states` includes indirect references — tables or views nested within other views (exluding MVs) but not directly referenced in the query.

Reviewer 2: > in the materialized view's fully expanded query tree at refresh time.

I am wondering if the wording of `fully expanded query tree` is still accurate with source MVs.

Maybe sth like this

---------
The refresh state record captures the state of source tables, views, and materialized views  at refresh time. 

* Source view states are stored in `source-view-states`. It includes indirect references — views nested within other views (excluding MVs). 
* Source table states are stored in `source-table-states`. It includes indirect references - tables nested within other views (excluding MVs).

> For source materialized views, both the source view and its storage table are included in the refresh state. Indirect references are excluded for materialized view sources; during read time, query engines may recursively expand the query tree to determine freshness. The refresh state has the following fields:

Reviewer 2: we need a blank line before this line for this to become a separate paragraph. 

We probably need some tweaks on the wording.

-----
For directly referenced source materialized views, both the source view and its storage table are included in the refresh state. Indirect references from source materialized views are excluded in the refresh-state. During read time, a query engine recursively expand the query tree to determine freshness if it chooses to enforce recursive evaluation semantic.   

The refresh state has the following fields:

### Storage table metadata

This section describes additional metadata for the storage table that supplements the regular table metadata and is required for materialized views.
The `refresh-state` property is set on the [snapshot summary](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#snapshots) property of a storage table snapshot to provide information about the state of the precomputed data.

| Requirement | Field name      | Description |
|-------------|-----------------|-------------|
| _optional_  | `refresh-state` | A [refresh state](#refresh-state) record stored as a JSON-encoded string |

#### Freshness

> A materialized view is **fresh** when the storage table represents the result of the current view query (at the materialized view's current `view-version-id`) over the current state of its dependencies. Dependencies are determined by parsing the SQL: base Iceberg tables, Iceberg views (whose own dependencies are transitively dependencies of the materialized view), and intermediate materialized views (treated as their storage tables, with their own freshness established recursively from their `refresh-state`).

Reviewer 3: s/transitively/transitive/

"Dependencies are determined by parsing the SQL:" 
  <<< that's not true for consumer, right ?  

intermediate is not a precise term here. may be more precise terminology: 
    base  materialized views ( referenced directly or indirectly  through views or materialized views )<< that's the intention

Reviewer: Instead of "intermediate" MV, how about "upstream" MVs?   This way can also talk about "downstream" MVs when discussing refresh propagation in future iterations of this spec.

Also, we agreed to remove the term "dependencies" from this section and only talk about dependencies in context of "refresh state" definition later in the spec.

Reviewer 3: i like upstream better ( it still preserves ambiguity , but we can use direct and indirect upstream for the cases when ambiguity needs be resolved)

A change to the materialized view's definition produces a new `view-version-id`; any storage-table snapshot recorded at a prior `view-version-id` is not fresh under the current definition.

The `refresh-state` summary on each storage-table snapshot records dependency state observed at refresh time. Producers populate it; consumers use it to assess freshness without re-executing the query. The spec does not mandate what producers record or how consumers assess. See [Appendix B](#appendix-b-what-counts-as-a-dependency) for what counts as a dependency.

##### Producer flexibility

Producers may selectively choose a subset of their dependencies to record — for example, skipping non-Iceberg sources or recording an empty list.

When writing the refresh state, producers:

- **Must** record `view-version-id` and `refresh-start-timestamp-ms`.

> - **Must** include all distinct source states for the inputs they chose to track.

Reviewer 3: Must ....... they chose to track.
sounds awkward and we talk about sources that may tracked by produces but not consumers in the next line ) 
  I think we can just use "Should" here

Reviewer 14: Agree Should make more sense.

Reviewer: Agree too..  "Should" is better.

A snapshot whose refresh state violates a `Must` rule is invalid; consumers may treat it as if it had no `refresh-state`.

##### Consumer options

Consumers may use any combination of the following to assess the storage table:

- **Recency policy.** Accept the storage table when `refresh-start-timestamp-ms` falls within a staleness window. A recency policy bounds data age but does not establish freshness.
- **Trust the recorded `source-states`.** Compare each entry against the current catalog state — `snapshot-id` for tables, `version-id` for views, optionally recursive verification for intermediate materialized views recorded by their storage tables. Also confirm that the recorded `view-version-id` equals the materialized view's current `view-version-id`.
- **Verify by parsing the view query.** Derive the dependency set from the SQL and confirm every dependency is covered by `source-states` and matches the current state. Treat any uncovered dependency as undetermined.

If a consumer's assessment passes, it reads from the storage table; otherwise it evaluates the view query in place of the storage table.

#### Refresh state

> The refresh state record captures the dependencies in the materialized view's dependency graph. Each dependency is recorded in `source-states` as either a `table` entry (a base table or an intermediate materialized view's storage table) or a `view` entry.

Reviewer 3: same as above let's use the same term as tables "base"; intermediate adds confusion IMO.

Reviewer: I'd prefer "upstream" MV over a "base" MV.  I think "base" should be reserved for tables.

The refresh state has the following fields:

| Requirement | Field name                   | Description |
|-------------|------------------------------|-------------|
| _required_  | `view-version-id`            | The `version-id` of the materialized view when the refresh operation was performed |
| _required_  | `source-states`              | A list of [source state](#source-state) records |
| _required_  | `refresh-start-timestamp-ms` | A timestamp of when the refresh operation was started |

#### Source state

Source state records capture the state of objects referenced by a materialized view. Each record has a `type` field that determines its form:

| Type    | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `table` | An Iceberg table — either a base table in the dependency graph, or the storage table of an intermediate materialized view |
| `view`  | An Iceberg view in the dependency graph |

> An intermediate materialized view must be recorded as a single `table` entry referencing its storage table; recording it as a `view` entry is not permitted. The intermediate materialized view's own dependencies are reached recursively through its `refresh-state`.

Reviewer 3: a `view` entry is not permitted. <<<that's really awkward.  
  Didn't we say that changing view version without refresh may or may not render MV not fresh.  by prohibiting this. the flexibility is removed.

Reviewer: I agree with Igor and Steven here too.

}
```

After a refresh operation, the storage table's snapshot summary contains the `refresh-state` property.
The following is an example of the `refresh-state` JSON value stored in the snapshot summary of the storage table:

```json
{
  "view-version-id" : 1,
  "refresh-start-timestamp-ms" : 1573518435000,
  "source-states" : [ {
    "type" : "table",
    "namespace" : [ "default" ],
    "name" : "events",
    "uuid" : "d4a10b5c-1e8a-4b72-9d67-3f4a8c9e1b2d",
    "snapshot-id" : 6148331192489823102
  } ]
}
```

## Appendix B: Example strategies for selecting dependencies

Producers may select different sets of dependencies to record in the refresh state. The strategies below illustrate common choices against the same shared query.

### Shared query

- `A` (the materialized view being refreshed): `SELECT ... FROM B JOIN C ON ...`
- `B` (regular view): `SELECT ... FROM E JOIN D ON ...`
- `C` (regular view or materialized view, varies by strategy): `SELECT ... FROM F JOIN G ON ...`
- `D` (regular view or materialized view, varies by strategy): `SELECT ... FROM H WHERE ...`
- `E`, `F`, `G`, `H`: base Iceberg tables

### Strategy 1: Track all nested tables and views (no nested MVs)

> The view query reads only base tables and regular views. The refresh state tracks snapshot IDs of all deeply nested base tables and version IDs of all views traversed. Reuse of the storage table is sensitive to changes in any of them.

Reviewer: Instead of "view query" can we say "refresh query".  This makes is more clear that the refresh query didn't use C and D's storage table.

    ├── F [TABLE]                       <-- recorded in A: snapshot-id: 102
    └── G [TABLE]                       <-- recorded in A: snapshot-id: 103
```

### Strategy 2: Treat nested materialized views as tables

Same as Strategy 1, but the query reads from materialized views. The producer stops at each MV boundary and records the MV's storage table snapshot ID. No expansion beyond the MV.

`C` and `D` are materialized views, treated as tables.

```
A [MV — being refreshed]
├── B [VIEW]                            <-- recorded in A: version-id: 5
│   ├── E [TABLE]                       <-- recorded in A: snapshot-id: 101
│   └── D [MV]                          <-- recorded in A: storage-table snapshot-id: 14
│       ┄┄┄┄┄┄ recursive boundary ┄┄┄┄┄┄
│       └── H [TABLE]                   (D's dependency; verified via D's refresh-state)
└── C [MV]                              <-- recorded in A: storage-table snapshot-id: 12
    ┄┄┄┄┄┄ recursive boundary ┄┄┄┄┄┄
    ├── F [TABLE]                       (C's dependency; verified via C's refresh-state)
    └── G [TABLE]                       (C's dependency; verified via C's refresh-state)
```

> `F`, `G`, and `H` do not appear in `A`'s `source-states`; they belong to `C` and `D`'s dependency graphs.

Reviewer: In this example, I think it's more logical to have included C and D in the refresh state as well.  Basically, if a MV directly references a view regardless if the view is used as a logical view or nested MV, I would have expected the view to be in the refresh state.  I wonder what others think?

Author: I agree, I've updated the document

### Strategy 3: Treat nested materialized views as views

Same as Strategy 1, but the query reads from materialized views. The producer treats each materialized view as a regular view: expand through the MV's view definition and record the underlying tables and views. The MV's storage table snapshot ID is **not** recorded.

`C` and `D` are materialized views, treated as views (expanded).

```
A [MV — being refreshed]
├── B [VIEW]                            <-- recorded in A: version-id: 5
│   ├── E [TABLE]                       <-- recorded in A: snapshot-id: 101
│   └── D [MV — expanded as view]       <-- recorded in A: version-id: 9
│       └── H [TABLE]                   <-- recorded in A: snapshot-id: 104

> └── C [MV — expanded as view]           <-- recorded in A: version-id: 7

Reviewer: This example would be more interesting if C's storage table was stale.  Otherwise, the refresh state here is the same as the refresh state from Strategy 1.

Author: I think the main point here is the semantics of recursively expanding the dependencies just like it were a view. I think the whole point is that the MV is treated like a view, so it is naturally similar to Strategy. I don' think that's an issue. The difference is that Strategy 1 are common views, while here it is materialized views.

Reviewer 6: Yes, the point is to illustrate the case when the MVs are treated as views, and require nested expansion, similar to Strategy 1 with virtual views.

### Strategy 5: Empty refresh state (recency only)

The producer leaves `source-states` empty and relies entirely on `refresh-start-timestamp-ms`. Consumers reuse the storage table based on a recency policy alone.

`A`'s refresh state:

```json
{
  "view-version-id": 1,
  "refresh-start-timestamp-ms": 1573518435000,
  "source-states": []
}
```

### Strategy 6: Skip non-Iceberg dependencies

The producer records only Iceberg sources and omits non-Iceberg dependencies entirely. Useful when the view query reads from a mix of Iceberg and non-Iceberg sources and the producer chooses to track only the Iceberg side.

Assume the query reads from base Iceberg tables `E`, `F`, `G`, `H` and an additional non-Iceberg table `N`.

```
A [MV — being refreshed]
├── E [TABLE]                           <-- recorded in A: snapshot-id: 101
├── F [TABLE]                           <-- recorded in A: snapshot-id: 102
├── G [TABLE]                           <-- recorded in A: snapshot-id: 103
├── H [TABLE]                           <-- recorded in A: snapshot-id: 104
└── N [NON-ICEBERG TABLE]               (omitted; not tracked)
```

> `N` is omitted. Consumers cannot verify `N`'s state from the refresh state alone.

Reviewer: nit: The consumer does know that the data queried from N cannot be older than refresh-start-timestamp-ms

    "version-id" : 1
  } ]
}
```

After a refresh operation, the storage table's snapshot summary contains the `refresh-state` property.
The following is an example of the `refresh-state` JSON value stored in the snapshot summary of the storage table:

```json
{
  "view-version-id" : 1,
  "refresh-start-timestamp-ms" : 1573518435000,
  "source-states" : [ {
    "type" : "table",
    "namespace" : [ "default" ],
    "name" : "events",
    "uuid" : "d4a10b5c-1e8a-4b72-9d67-3f4a8c9e1b2d",
    "snapshot-id" : 6148331192489823102
  } ]
}
```

## Appendix B: What counts as a dependency

The dependencies of a materialized view are determined by parsing the view query:

- **Base Iceberg tables** in the dependency graph are recorded by `snapshot-id`.
- **Iceberg views** in the dependency graph are recorded by `version-id`. A view's own dependencies are transitively dependencies of the materialized view and appear as additional entries in `source-states`.
- **Intermediate materialized views** in the dependency graph are treated as their storage tables and recorded by the storage table's `snapshot-id`. Their own freshness is established recursively from their `refresh-state`.

> ### Example

Reviewer: @wmoustafa asked if I could propose some description for Appendix B which is one possibility for how a producer and consumer could use the refresh state to record and evaluate freshness.

This example explains how a producer and consumer can work together to record and evaluate freshness.  This example assumes:

- Querying materialized view must be equivalent to querying base tables directly
- Materialized view contains only Iceberg tables
- Materialized view can be built on top of other materialized views 
- Additional work on consumer to recursively evaluate materialized view freshness

The query under examination:

- `A` (the materialized view being refreshed): `SELECT ... FROM B JOIN C ON ...`
- `B` (regular view): `SELECT ... FROM E JOIN D ON ...`
- `C` (materialized view): `SELECT ... FROM F JOIN G ON ...`
- `D` (materialized view): `SELECT ... FROM H WHERE ...`
- `E`, `F`, `G`, `H`: base Iceberg tables

> `A`'s dependencies are `B`, `C`, and `D`. `B` is a regular view; its own dependencies (`E` and `D`) are transitively dependencies of `A`. `C` and `D` are materialized views; they appear in `A`'s `source-states` as their storage tables.

Reviewer 2: why A depends on D here? D is not direct child of A

Reviewer: I agree with Steven.   D is not a direct dependency for A.  A only directly depends on B and C.

```
A [MV — being refreshed]
├── B [VIEW]                            <-- recorded in A: version-id
│   ├── E [TABLE]                       <-- recorded in A: snapshot-id
│   └── D [MV]                          <-- recorded in A: storage-table snapshot-id
│       ┄┄┄┄┄┄ recursive boundary ┄┄┄┄┄┄
│       └── H [TABLE]                   (D's dependency; verified via D's refresh-state)
└── C [MV]                              <-- recorded in A: storage-table snapshot-id
    ┄┄┄┄┄┄ recursive boundary ┄┄┄┄┄┄
    ├── F [TABLE]                       (C's dependency; verified via C's refresh-state)
    └── G [TABLE]                       (C's dependency; verified via C's refresh-state)
```

`A`'s `source-states`:

| type    | name          | recorded id        |
|---------|---------------|--------------------|
| `view`  | `B`           | `version-id: 5`    |
| `table` | `E`           | `snapshot-id: 101` |
| `table` | `C` (storage) | `snapshot-id: 12`  |
| `table` | `D` (storage) | `snapshot-id: 14`  |

`F`, `G`, and `H` do not appear in `A`'s `source-states` directly; they belong to `C` and `D`'s dependency sets and are reached recursively through `C` and `D`'s refresh states.

> A consumer establishes `A`'s freshness by checking each entry in `source-states` against the current catalog state. For `C` and `D`, the consumer compares the recorded storage-table snapshot to the current snapshot, then recurses into their `refresh-state` to verify each is itself fresh.

Reviewer: For C and D, it would be really nice if the consumer could know up front whether the table was a base table or storage table.

  "format-version" : 1,
  "location" : "s3://bucket/warehouse/default.db/event_agg_mv",
  "current-version-id" : 1,
  "properties" : {
    "comment" : "Precomputed daily event counts"
  },
  "versions" : [ {
    "version-id" : 1,
    "timestamp-ms" : 1573518431292,
    "schema-id" : 1,
    "default-catalog" : "prod",
    "default-namespace" : [ "default" ],
    "summary" : {
      "engine-name" : "Spark",
      "engine-version" : "3.4.1"
    },
    "representations" : [ {
      "type" : "sql",
      "sql" : "SELECT\n    COUNT(1), CAST(event_ts AS DATE)\nFROM events\nGROUP BY 2",
      "dialect" : "spark"
    } ],
    "storage-table" : {
      "namespace" : [ "default" ],
      "name" : "event_agg_mv__storage"
    }
  } ],
  "schemas": [ {
    "schema-id": 1,
    "type" : "struct",
    "fields" : [ {
      "id" : 1,
      "name" : "event_count",
      "required" : false,
      "type" : "int",
      "doc" : "Count of events"
    }, {
      "id" : 2,
      "name" : "event_date",
      "required" : false,
      "type" : "date"
    } ]
  } ],
  "version-log" : [ {
    "timestamp-ms" : 1573518431292,
    "version-id" : 1
  } ]
}
```

> After a refresh operation, the storage table's snapshot summary contains the `refresh-state` property.

Reviewer 16: With regards to repeated "refresh" operations, is there any note worth adding in the spec on expiring snapshots of the storage table.

Is the expiration of previous snapshots a query engine detail or there is an opportunity to add more details on the spec about how it is happening?
